This brings us to the end of the six weeks
course. I had a lot of fun teaching this
course and I hope you enjoyed it too. I
really love this material and I always
enjoy teaching it. Before we say our
farewells, please do a quick review of the
topics that we discussed and see what's
left to cover. So here's a brief diagram
of the primitive that we discussed in the
class. If you remember in week one we
started off by discussing pseudorandom
generators and stream ciphers. In week two
we talked about block ciphers and we said
that the right way to think about block
cipher is as pseudorandom permutations and
pseudorandom functions. We said that using
counter mode we can convert a block cipher
into a PRG. And we said that using the GGM
construction. We can construct block
ciphers from pseudorandom generators. Then
in week three, we talked about data
integrity. In particular, we talked about
MACs and we looked at various
constructions of MACs from pseudorandom
functions like the CMAC, the HMAC, the
PMAC constructions and so on. We also
discussed collision resistance and we said
that collision resistance can be used for
data integrity where one has access to
read-only memory. Basically, you would
hash the data using a collision resistance
hash function; write the hash into
read-only memory. And then later, when you
want to verify authenticity of your data,
you just compare its hash to whatever is
written in read-only memory. Then in week 4
we talked about how to combine integrity
and confidentiality, in particular we
kinda talk about to combine encryption and
MACs to build what we called Authenticated
Encryption and I told you that really in
practice, the only foremost Symmetric
Encryption that you're allowed to use is
Authenticated Encryption. Basically,
encryption that's only secure against
eavesdropping attacks is not generally
secure, you must always also guard against
tampering and as a result, you should only
be using Authenticated Encryption modes to
do Symmetric Encryption. So that was the
end of week four. And then for weeks five
and six, we switched topics and talked
about key exchange and public key encryption.
In particular, in week five we talked
about Trapdoor Functions and the
Diffie-Hellman Protocol [within??] the
Mathematics that are necessary to explain
how those things work. And then in week
six we talked about how public key encryption
can be built from trapdoor functions and,
the Diffie-Hellman Protocol. I wanna
emphasize that the key exchange protocols
that we saw in week five are only secure
against eavesdropping and should never be
used in practice. In fact in week eight
we're gonna see authenticated key exchange
protocols and those are the ones that are
actually used in the wild for example in
SSL and other protocols like that. But,
the ones that we saw in week five should
never actually be deployed in the real
world. The only reason we looked at those
simple key exchange mechanisms was as
motivation for trapdoor functions and
Diffie-Hellman groups. Now as you know there
are four more weeks to the full crypto
course which we're gonna do at a later
time. In week seven we're gonna talk about
digital signatures and how to authenticate
data in a way that anyone can verify that
the data is authentic. Then we're gonna
talk about authenticated key exchanges as
I said then we're gonna talk about user
authentication, how to manage passwords,
one time passwords, challenge-response
protocols. Then we'll talk about various
privacy mechanisms. How to authenticate
yourself without revealing where you are,
How to sign in a way it doesn't reveal who
you are and so on and so forth. And in this part
of the building blocks for some of these
mechanisms, actually, we'll talk about
zero-knowledge protocols which is kind of
a general purpose tool that's used very
widely in cryptography. But let's just say
that crypto goes way beyond this core
topics and in fact, there are many, many
more topics that I would love to tell you
about if there was enough time. So I made
this kind of a short list here and this isn't
even an exhaustive list. There are many
other things that I would like to tell you
about and so if there's enough demand, I
might even run an advanced crypto class
which is usually what I do for graduate
students which would cover these more
advanced topics but that would actually
take place sometime next year so stay
tuned and I will send announcements on
when that's coming. So my final words of
course remember my main message from this
class. And that crypto is a tremendous
tool but you should always be careful when
you use it. If you implement crypto
incorrectly, the system will work
perfectly fine. It would be no way to
tell that anything is wrong except when
attacker is trying to attack the system,
it might be easily breakable. And so
crypto is one of these things where a
little bit of knowledge is quite
dangerous. It's quite important to make
sure you get the implementation correctly
and one way to do that is to make sure
that always other people review your code
and your designs to find any bugs in the
crypto implementation or even more general
bugs in the system design. And finally
I'll leave you with these parting words, that you should never ever invent your own
ciphers or your own modes and you should
never even implement your own ciphers or
your own modes. Try to stick to the
standards as much as possible. Try to
stick to standard implementations of those
algorithms as much as possible and if you
have to deviate from that, then just make
sure there's sufficient third party review
of what you've done. Okay, so I will
say my farewell here. And let me say that
the final exam will be made available on
week seven, basically, a week after the
week six lectures become public. The final
exam will cover material for all six weeks
and it'll pretty much be the same format
as the problem sets. I hope everybody will
do well in the exam and we will send
certificates once all those course work is
complete and I hope to see you in the next
iteration of this course whenever that's
made available. So farewell, and as
always, please submit your comments and
suggestions on the forum. I read all of
your posts and they're very, very helpful
in improving the course. Hope to see you
in the fall.
