There is an immense literature on attacking block ciphers.
In this segment, I just want to give you a taste for
what these attacks look like.
And I hope I'll convince you that you should never
ever design your own block cipher,
and just stick to the standards like Triple DES
and AES.
The first set of attacks that I want to talk about
are attacks on the
implementation of the block cipher.
As an example, imagine you have a smart card that's implementing a block cipher.
So the smart card, for example, could be used for
credit card payments. It might have a
secret key inside of it to authenticate
your credit card payments as you stick the
card into a payment terminal, say. So now,
if an attacker obtains your smart card,
what he could do is he could actually take
the smart card to a lab, and then run the
card, and measure very precisely how much
time the card took to do encryption and
decryption. Now, if the amount of time
that the implementation took to do
encryption depends on bits of the secret
key, then by measuring the time, the
attacker will learn something about your
secret key and in fact, he might be able
to completely extract your secret key. And
there are many examples of implementations
that simply by measuring the time very
precisely for many operations of
encryption algorithms, you can completely
extract the secret key. Another example is,
rather than just measuring the time, you
can actually measure the power consumption
of the card as it's operating. So,
literally, you can connect it to a device
that will measure the current that the
card is drawing and then graph the
currents very, very precisely. Now, these
cards are not very fast, and as a result,
you can actually measure the exact amount
of power consumed at every clock cycle as
the card was executing. When you do that,
you actually get graphs of this form.
So this is an example of a smart card
operating, while it's doing the
DES computation. So you can see
very clearly, here's when it was doing
the initial permutation. Here's when it's
doing the final permutation. And then,
here, you can count. There are actually
sixteen hills and troughs
corresponding to the sixteen rounds. And
essentially when you zoom in on a graph
like this, you can basically read the key
bits off one by one, just by looking at
how much power the card consumed as it was
doing the different operations. It turns out
that, even cards that take steps to mask
this type of information, are still
vulnerable. There's an attack called differential power analysis, where
basically, you measure the power consumed
by the card over many, many, many, runs of
the encryption algorithm. And as long as
there's any even small dependence between
the amount of current consumed and the
bits of the secret key, basically that
dependence will show up after enough runs of the encryption algorithm. And as a
result you'll be able to completely
extract the secret key. Okay, so these
attacks were actually discovered by Paul
Kocher and his colleagues up at
Cryptography Research and there's actually
a fairly large industry devoted to just
defending against these power attacks. As
far as timing attacks are concerned,
I want to mention that these are real.
They're not just about smart cards.
For example, you can imagine a multicore
processor where the encryption algorithm
is running on one core and the attacker
code happens to be running on another
core. Now these cores actually share the
same cache. And as a result, an attacker
can actually measure or can actually look
at the exact cache misses that the
encryption algorithm incurred. It turns
out that by looking at cache misses, you
can completely figure out the secret key
used by the algorithms. So, one core can
essentially extract information from the
other core, just by looking at cache misses.
So implementing these block ciphers is actually quite subtle
because you have to make sure that the
side channel attacks don't leak
information about your secret key. Another
type of attack that's been discussed in
the literature is what's called a fault
attack. So here, basically, if you're
attacking a smart card, you can actually
cause the smart card to malfunction,
perhaps by overclocking it, perhaps by
warming it up. Essentially, you can cause
the processor to, malfunction, and output
erroneous data. It turns out that, if,
during encryption, there are errors in the
last round of the encryption process, the
resulting ciphertexts that are produced are
enough to actually expose the secret key K.
That's quite an interesting result that
in fact if you have any errors, if you ever
output a wrong result, that actually could
completely compromise your secret key.
So, of course, the defense against this means
that before you output the result of your
algorithm, you should check to make sure
that the correct result was computed.
Now of course that's nontrivial, because how do
you know that the error didn't happen
in your checking algorithm. But there are
known ways around that. So basically you
can actually compute something three or
four times, take the majority over all those
results, and be assured that the output
really is correct as long as not too many
faults occurred inside of your computation. These are attacks on the implementation.
I hope these examples can assure you that not only should you not
invent your own block ciphers, you should
never even implement these crypto
primitives yourself. Because A, you have
to make sure there are no side channel
attachments on your implementation and B,
you have to make sure that the
implementation is secure against fault
attacks. Okay so, instead you should just
use standard libraries like the ones
available in OpenSSL and many other
libraries out there. So don't implement
these primitives yourself, just use
existing libraries. All right, so now I want
to turn to kind of more sophisticated
attacks on block ciphers and I'll particularly
talk about how these attacks apply to DES.
Okay so these attacks were discovered by
Biham and Shamir back in 1989, and I'll
particularly describe a version of the
attack discovered by Matsui in 1993.
So the goal here is basically given many,
many input-output pairs, can we actually
recover the key better than exhaustive
search? So anything that runs better than
exhaustive search already counts as an
attack on the block cipher. Okay, so the
example I want to give you is what's called
linear cryptanalysis. And here imagine it
so happens that, you know, c is the
encryption of m using key k, and
suppose it so happens that if I look at
random key and a random message, somehow
there's a dependence between the message,
ciphertext, and the key bits. In
particular, if I XOR a subset of
the message bits, so this is just a
subset of the message bits, if I XOR that with a certain subset of the ciphertext
bits. —So these two the attacker
sees. The attacker has the message and the
attacker has the ciphertext. And then you
compare that to an XOR of a subset of
the key bits. Now if the two were
completely independent which is what you'd
like, you definitely don't want your
message and your ciphertext to somehow
predict your key bits, if the two are
like, completely independent, then this
equality will hold with probability
exactly one-half. But suppose it so
happens that there's a bias and this
probability holds with probability half
plus epsilon for some small epsilon. It so
happens that, in fact, for DES, there is
such a relation. The relation holds
specifically because of a bug in the design
of the fifth S-box. It turns out the fifth
S-box happens to be too close to a linear
function. And that linear function,
basically, as it propagates through the
entire DES circuit, generates a relation
of this type. You notice, this is
basically a linear relation that's being
computed here. So, this small tiny, tiny
linearity in the fifth S-box generates
this relation over the entire circuit,
where the epsilon is tiny. Epsilon is one
over 2^21, and I wrote down what
that is. So the bias is really, really,
really small. But nevertheless, there is a
bias using these particular subsets of bits. Now, I'm not going to show you how to
derive this relation, or I'm not going to show you even what it is. I'll just tell you
how to use a relation like this once you find it. Okay. So here's our relation
that we have. And the question is how to
use it. So with a little bit of statistics
you can actually use an equation like this
to determine some of the key bits. And
here's you do it. Suppose you were given one over epsilon squared message-ciphertext pairs.
And these have to be
independently random messages and the
corresponding ciphertexts. What you would
do is you would use the formula above. In
fact you would use the left-hand side of
the formula above to compute this relation
between the message and ciphertext for
all the pairs you were given. Now what do
you know? You know that for half plus
epsilon of these values, you know that
these things will be equal to an
XOR of the key bits. So if you
take majority over all the values you've
computed, it turns out it's not so
difficult to see that in fact you'll get
the correct prediction for the XOR of the
key bits with a probability of 97.7%. In
other words, if this relation happens to
be correct more than half the time, then
the majority will be right. And because
there's a bias, there's an epsilon bias, the probability that you will be correct
more than half the time is, in fact,
97.7%. In which case, the majority, in
fact, will give you the correct XOR of the
key bits. Okay? So this is kinda cool.
Within one over epsilon squared time, you
can figure out an XOR of a bunch of key
bits. So now, let's apply this to DES.
So, for DES, we have epsilon, which is one
over 2^21. Which means that if you give me
2^42 input-output pairs, I can
figure out an XOR of the key bits. And now,
it turns out, I'm not gonna exactly show
you how, roughly speaking, using this
method, you don't just get one key bit. In
fact, you get two key bits. You can kind
of use this relation. One's going in a
forward direction and one's going in a
backwards direction. So that gives you two
XORs of bits of the secret key. Okay, so
that's two bits of information about the
secret key. And then it turns out you can
get twelve more bits, because,
essentially, you can figure out what the
inputs are to the fifth S-box. Okay, so,
I'm not going to exactly show you how. But it
turns out you can get twelve more bits,
which is a total of fourteen bits overall.
So now, using this method, you've
recovered fourteen bits of the secret key.
And of course, it took you time 2^42.
Okay, so then, what do you do?
Well, so the rest of it is easy. Now what
you're going to do is you're going to do
exhaustive search on the remaining bits.
Well how many remaining bits are there?
Well, there are 42 remaining bits, so
the exhaustive search will take you time 2^42. So what's the total attack time?
Well, the first step of the algorithm
to determine the fourteen bits took 2^42 time,
and the remaining brute force
search also took 2^42 time.
So overall, the attack took two to the 43
time. Okay? So now, this is much better
than exhaustive search. Within two to the
43 time, we broke DES. But of course, this
required two to the 42 random input-output
pairs whereas exhaustive search only
required three pairs. Okay, so this is a
fairly large number of input-output
pairs that are needed, but given such a
large number, you can actually recover the
key faster than exhaustive search. Okay,
so what's the lesson in all this?
The lesson is, firstly, any tiny bit of
linearity, basically, in this— in the
fifth S-box, which was not designed as
well as the other S-boxes, basically led
to an attack on the algorithm. Okay. A tiny
beat of linearity already introduced this
linear attack. And I want to emphasize
again that this is not the sort of thing
you would think of when you design a cipher. And so again, the conclusion here is,
there are very subtle attacks on block
ciphers, ones which you will not be able to
find yourself. And so just stick to the
standards. Don't ever, ever, ever, ever
design your block cipher. Okay, so that's
all I want to say about sophisticated
attacks. Now let's move on to the last
type of attack that I want to mention, which
I'll call quantum attacks, which are
again— these are generic attacks on
all block ciphers. So let me explain what
I mean by this.
So first of all, let's look at a generic problem, a generic search problem. Suppose I have a function
on some large domain X, that happens to be
two outputs, either zero or one.
And it so happens that this function is mostly
zero. And there's, like, maybe one input
where the function happens to evaluate to
one. And your goal is basically, you know,
find me the inputs where the function
happens to be one. Maybe there's only one
such input. But your goal is to find it.
Well, so on a classical computer, what can
you do? The function is given to you. It's
given to you as a black box. So the best
you can do is just try all possible
inputs. So this is gonna take time which
in linear in the size of the domain. Now,
it turns out there's an absolutely magical
result that says that if you build a
computer that's based on quantum physics
as opposed to classical physics, you can
solve this problem faster. So let me
explain what I mean by this. So first of
all in the 70s and 80s it was observed, I
think it was actually Richard Feynman who observed this initially, that said
that it turns out to be very difficult to
simulate quantum experiments on a
classical computer. So Feynman said, if
that's the case, maybe these quantum
experiments are computing things that a
classical computer can't compute.
So they're somehow able to compute very
quickly things that are very difficult to
do classically. And that turned out to be
correct. And in fact, the example I want
to show you is one of these amazing things that in fact, if you could build a
quantum computer that's using quantum
physics, then it's, in fact, you can solve
this search problem not in time X but in
time square root of X. So somehow, even
though the computer doesn't know anything
about the function F, it's treating it as
a black box, nevertheless, it's able to
find a point where the function is one, in
time square root of X. I'm not going to explain this here, but, at the end of the
class, we're gonna have an advanced topics
lecture. And if you'd like me to explain
how this algorithm works, I can explain it
in that advanced topics lecture.
It's actually quite interesting, and, in fact,
quantum computers have quite an impact on
crypto. And again, as I said, I can
explain this in the very last lecture.
All right. So what does this have to do with
breaking block cyphers? So far it's just a
generic search problem. Well, oh actually
I should say before I show you the
application, I should mention that, well,
you might be wondering, well, can someone
build a quantum computer. And this is
still completely unknown. At this point,
nobody really knows if we can build
large enough quantum computers to actually
take advantage of this beautiful algorithm
due to Grover. Alright, so what does this
have to do with block ciphers? Well, so
suppose I give you a message-ciphertext pair.
Just one or just a few. We can
define a function as follows. It's a
function on K, it's a function on, the key
space. And the function will basically
output one if it so happens that the
encryption of m with k maps to c, and it
will output zero otherwise. Now we argue
that basically this is exactly the type of
function that's one at one point in the
key space and that's it. So by Grover's
algorithm, we can actually find the secret
key in time square root of K.
So what does that mean? For DES, this would
totally destroy DES. This would say
that in time 2^28, you could
find a key. 2^28 is about 200 million.
So 200 million steps which is, you know, just takes a millisecond on a modern computer.
This would totally destroy DES. But even AES with 128-bit keys,
you would be able to find the secret
key in time, roughly 2^64.
And 2^64 is these days, considered
insecure. That's within the realm of
exhaustive search. And so, basically, if
somebody was able to build a quantum
computer, we would then say that AES-128
is no longer secure. Instead, if somebody,
you know, if tomorrow, you open up the
newspaper, and you read an article that
says, you know, so-and-so built a
quantum computer, the conclusion, the
consequence of all that is that you should
immediately move to block ciphers that use
256 bits, because then the running time
of Grover's algorithm is 2^128,
which is more time than we consider
feasible, and the, basically there are
example ciphers with 256 bits, for
example, AES-256. This is one of the
reasons why AES was designed with 256
bits in mind. But to be honest, this is
not the only reason. There are other reasons why you want it to have larger key sizes.
Okay, so this is, as I said, just a taste of the different attacks on block ciphers,
and I'm gonna leave it at that. If we decide on quantum for the last
topic of the course, then we'll recover
that in the very last lecture.
