In the last segment, we saw two active
attacks that can completely destroy the
security of CPA secure encryption. In this
segment, we're gonna define a new concept,
called authenticated encryption, that
remains secure in the presence of an
active adversary. In later segments, we'll
construct encryption schemes that satisfy
this new authenticated encryption concept.
So what is authenticated encryption?
Authenticated encryption is a cipher where
as usual the encryption algorithm takes a
key, a message and optionally a nonce and outputs
a cipher text. The decryption algorithm as
usual outputs a message. However, here the
decryption algorithm is allowed to output
a special symbol called bottom. When the
decryption algorithm outputs the symbol
bottom, basically it says that the cipher
text is invalid and should be ignored. The
only requirement is that this bottom is
not in the message space so that in fact
it is a unique symbol that indicates that
the cipher text should be rejected. Now
what does it mean for an authenticated
encryption system to be secure? Well the
system has to satisfy two properties. The
first property is that it has to be
semantically secure under a chosen
plaintext attack just as before. But now
there's a second property which says that
the system also has to satisfy what's
called cipher text integrity. What that
means is that even though the attacker
gets to see a number of cipher texts, it
should not be able to produce another
cipher text that decrypts properly. In
other words, that decrypts to something
other than bottom. More precisely,
let's look at the ciphertext integrity game.
So here, (E,D) is a cipher with message
space M. As usual, the challenger begins
by choosing a random key K. And
the adversary can submit messages of his
choice, and receive the encryptions of
those messages. So here, C1 is the
encryption of M1, where M1 was chosen by
the adversary. And the adversary can do
this repeatedly. In other words, he
submits M2 and obtains the encryption of
M2, and so on and so forth. He submits
many more messages up until Mq and obtains
the encryption of all those messages. So
here the adversary obtained Q cipher texts
for messages of his choice. Then his goal
is to produce some new cipher text that's
valid. So we'll say that the adversary
wins the game if basically this new cipher
text that the adversary created decrypts
correctly, in other words decrypts to
something other than bottom. And it's a
new cipher text. In other words, it's not
one of the cipher texts that was given to
the adversary as part of this chosen
plaintext attack. And then as usual we
defined the adversary's advantage in the
cipher text integrity game as the
probability that the challenger outputs
one at the end of the game and we'll say
that the cipher has cipher text integrity
if in fact for all efficient adversaries
the advantage in winning this game is
negligible. So now that we understand
what cipher text integrity is we can
define authenticated encryption and
basically we say that the cipher has
authenticated encryption if as we said
it's semantically secure under a chosen
plaintext attack and it also has cipher
text integrity. So just as a bad example,
let me mention that CBC with a random IV
does not provide authenticated encryption
because it's very easy for the adversary
to win the cipher text integrity game.
The adversary simply submits a random cipher text
and since the decryption algorithm for 
CBC encryption never outputs bottom,
it always outputs some message, 
the adversary just easily wins the game.
Any old random cipher text will decrypt 
to something other than bottom
and therefore the adversary directly wins 
the cipher-text integrity game. So this is just
a trivial example of a CPA secure cipher that 
does not provide authenticated encryption.
So I wanna mention two implications of
authenticated encryption. The first I'll
call authenticity, which means that,
basically, an attacker cannot fool the
recipient, Bob, into thinking that Alice
sent a certain message that she didn't
actually send. So let's see what I mean by
that. Well, here, the attacker basically
gets to interact with Alice, and get her
to encrypt arbitrary messages of his
choice. So this is a chosen plain text
attack. And then the attacker's goal is to
produce some cipher text that was not
actually created by Alice. And because the
attacker can't win the cipher text
integrity game, he can't do this. What
this means is, when Bob receives the
cipher text that decrypts correctly under
the decryption algorithm, he knows that
the message must have come from someone
who knows the secret key K. In particular,
if Alice is the only one who knows K, then
he knows the cipher text really did come
from Alice, and it's not some modification
that was sent by the attacker. Now the
only caveat to that is that authenticated
encryption doesn't defend against replay
attacks. In particular, the attacker
could've intercepted some cipher text from
Alice to Bob. And could have replayed it
and both cipher text would look valid to
Bob. So for example, Alice might send a
message to Bob saying transfer $100 to
Charlie. Then Charlie could replay that
cipher text and as a result, Bob would
transfer another $100 to Charlie. So in
fact, any encryption protocol has to
defend against replay attacks and this is
not something that's directly prevented by
authenticated encryption. And we'll come
back and talk about replay attacks in two
segments. The second implication of
authenticated encryption is that it
defends against a very powerful type of
adversary, namely an adversary that can
mount what's called a chosen cipher text
attack. We're going to talk about that
actually in the next segment.
